For that in the components folder
I'll add a new sub folder.
I'll name it Demo.
And in there I'll add a new file.
And that's my DemoOutput.js file
where I import React from react.
And then here I have the DemoOutput where I get props
and I export this as a default, of course.
So that's a standard component.
At least it is as soon as we return js
and now I'll take my paragraph here.
This is new.
Remove this line here from the app component
and add it instead here as the return value.
To be precise, I'll do something slightly different now,
I will not conditionally render my own component or not
because it should be obvious that this will behave
like rendering the built-in paragraph component or not.
Instead, inside of DemoOutput
I'll change the HTML structure a tiny bit.
It'll not just be this paragraph like this.
Instead, I will render this text
in the paragraph conditionally
and I will render it conditionally
based on some data I get through props
so that I can check if props show for example.
So if the show prop is truthy
let's say we expect a Boolean here.
So if it is true, and if that is the case
then I want to render "This is new!"
otherwise I will render an empty string.
So the paragraph element is always rendered
just the text changes now
based on the show prop.
So now back in app component 'Hi there!'
for one to include my DemoOutput here.
So make sure you import DemoOutput of course,
and there, I want to set the show prop
because we use that show prop in DemoOutput.
And the value we pass here
should of course be ShowParagraph
because that is a Boolean.
It is false initially,
and it's changed to true if we click the button
and then back to false ends on.
So now it is component here is always rendered
and in the component, the paragraph is always rendered
but the text that's shown
that will change based on the show prop.
So now if I saved that,
let's go back.
First of all, if it clicked this you see
we got basically the same behavior
as before there is no great difference.
Now, if we expand our Dom here a little bit
we see of course that the paragraph is always there
but again, if it clicked a button,
we see that the paragraph flashes when I click it
and it flashes again if I click it again,
the reason for the paragraph flashing
is that we now only work with that element
and we add or remove the text.
And this is treated as a change for entire element
which is why the paragraph flashes and not just the text
because the text is basically like a prop to the paragraph.
You could say it's it's content,
but again it's just a paragraph.
It's not the h1 or the button element.
So the fact that we're using a custom element,
a custom component does not change this.
And of course it shouldn't
the updating mechanism should always work
by comparing differences.
It is of course, interesting to see
that we are changing state in the app component.
And yet only the paragraph
which is part of another component flashes.
So this of course, proofs that the react updating
and diffing mechanism works and finds out changes correctly.
Now, another thing is also interesting though,
if we go to the Console
and a reload here, you see app running
and you see that,
of course runs whenever I click this button.
Now keep in mind the actual change happens in DemoOutput
but of course the app component runs again as well
because that's where we managed the state.
And I mentioned the component where you manage state
or where you have props or context
and that state props or context changes
that component will be re-evaluated and re-executed.
And we are managing the state in app.
So just because the change
visually only affects this paragraph in another component
does not mean that the app component is not re-evaluated.
Of course it is because there we manage our state
and that's, by the way
also what I meant earlier with props and context
in the end always coming down to state changes.
The props we got in DemoOutput
are of course responsible for why DemoOutput is re-rendered.
But ultimately of course, the value we get here
on the show prop
is the value we manage in the ShowParagraph state,
ultimately it all comes down to state
and state changes in react.
Now it, of course should be obvious
that if I now add a console log here in DemoOutput
that we'll see this being printed
for every button click as well.
We see it initially
because that component is rendered initially.
And then if I click Toggle Paragraph,
well, we again see DemoOutput running for every click.
And again, that makes a lot of sense
because the props changed with every click.
So thus far, this hopefully all is pretty clear
and pretty straightforward.
Now I'll show you something that might be confusing.
Keep in mind the DemoOput running is printed
for every click.
And again, that makes sense because we do change the state
and therefore the props here with every click.
But now let me tweak this in App.js
I will now hide the code to value I pass to show
and it will set this to false.
This means that we'll never show the output
because it's now detached from the ShowParagraph state.
Indeed, I'm not using the ShowParagraph state at the moment.
I'm still changing it, but I'm not using the state value.
Now, what would you expect as a result?
Let's see if the app reload
we see app running and DemoOutput running makes sense.
The app just loaded, both was rendered,
but something interesting happens
when I click Toggle Paragraph.
If I do that, you see app running,
okay, we changed the state there
but you also see DemoOutput running.
And that's interesting.
The props didn't change, right?
We have to show prop
and the value I pass in there is still false.
It never changes, it's always false.
So why was DemoOutput re-executed?
Well, let's take it step by step.
The app function is re-executed because state changed here.
Now, what is part of that app function?
Of course, this return statement
and there we return some js code.
Now, all those js elements here
in the end are like function calls
to the respect of component functions.
So we call the function for the DemoOutput component.
We call the function for the button component.
That's why those child components are also re-executed
and re-evaluated just because the parent component changed
because they are part
of the parent components, function body.
And if the parent component function runs again
of course the child component functions also run again.
So in the end, the prop value doesn't even matter here
for this component to be executed again,
it's just a fact that the parent changed.
Changes in props
might lead to actual changes on the real Dom
but for the function to be re-evaluated
it's enough that the parent component was re-evaluated.
Of course, the fact that DemoOutput runs again
does not mean that the real Dom is touched.
We can verify this with elements
there you'll see that nothing flashes.
I can hammer that button and nothing changes there
because react just re-evaluates the components.
And as you learned, re-evaluating a component
and re-running its component function
is not the same as re-rendering the real Dom
or manipulating the real Dom.
But it is really important to understand
that if a component is re-executed
all its child components
will also be re-executed and re-evaluated.
So therefore of course not just a DemoOutput component
is re-evaluated, the button is as well.
If I console log button running here
you will see that if I go to Console and reload
we see all three outputs initially.
And if I click this Toggle Paragraph button
we also see all three.
So the button component is also re-evaluated as well.
This of course brings up one question though,
here we have a very simple app
just one route component with two child components
which then each don't have any more child components
if they would have child components though
those child components would also be re-evaluated
of course and I can show this to you.
If I add a, MyParagraph.js file here
where I essentially copied DemoOutput,
but I then simplify this
and here I have MyParagraph also as a component name.
And then in there, I just output a paragraph tag
with props children in between.
I can use MyParagraph instead of the built in paragraph.
And I'm really just doing this for demo purposes here
to show you how react updating works.
Not because this would be such a useful component, it isn't.
But now with that, if I add MyParagraph
which replaces to build-in paragraph, just to then reuse it
if I add this you'll of course will see
in the console that MyParagraph running also is re-executed
for every button click.
So this continuous down the component tree
and this poses or this brings up one important question,
isn't this bad?
Because if all those component functions are re-executed
that's a lot of ongoing function executions
and virtual comparisons
that certainly costs some performance, right?
So isn't this bad if there actually is no reason for that
because we know for example,
that we never need to re-evaluate DemoOutput
because it can't change.
The only prop, which it has is hard coded.
If it had no props at all
we also would know the output in there will never change
because of the state that's managed in app component.
So re-executing DemoOutput
and all its children is a total waste.